workers: add Turso + Workers tutorial (#8302)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: content/workers/tutorials/connect-to-turso-using-workers/index.md

```sh
$ turso db create my-db
# Example:
[===>                ]
Creating database my-db in Los Angeles, California (US) (lax)
# Once succeeded:
Created database my-db in Los Angeles, California (US) (lax) in 34 seconds.
```

With your first database created, you can now connect to it directly and execute SQL against it:

```sh
$ turso db shell my-db
```

In order to get started, we need to create and define a schema for our first table. In this example, we'll create a very simple `example_users` table with one column: `email` (of type `text`) and then populate it with one email address.

In the shell you just opened, past in the following SQL:

```sql
create table example_users (email text);
insert into example_users values ("foo@bar.com");
```

If the SQL statements succeeded, there will be no output. Note that the trailing semi-colons (`;`) are necessary to terminate each SQL statement.

Type `.quit` to exit the shell.

## Use Wrangler to create a Workers project

{{<Aside type="note">}}

Ensure you have [Wrangler installed](/workers/wrangler/install-and-update/) before you continue.

> {{</Aside>}}

Reviewer: Strictly speaking, I don't think this is necessary since the npx command below will download and run wrangler without any prior work.  If it's not installed, npx will prompt to install it.

The Workers command-line interface, [Wrangler](/workers/wrangler/install-and-update/), allows you to create, locally develop, and publish your Workers projects.

To create a new Workers project (named worker-turso-ts), run the following:

```sh

> $ npx wrangler init worker-turso-ts

Reviewer: If we are requiring full installation of wrangler, then this should drop the npx from the command. (npx-or-not)

```sh
$ cd worker-turso-ts
```

In your project directory, wrangler init has generated the following files:

* `wrangler.toml`: Your Wrangler configuration file.
* `src/index.ts`: A minimal Hello World Worker written in TypeScript
* `package.json`: A minimal Node dependencies configuration file. Only generated if indicated in wrangler init command.
* `tsconfig.json`: TypeScript configuration that includes Workers types. Only generated if indicated in wrangler init command.

For this tutorial, only the `wrangler.toml` and `src/index.ts` files are relevant. We won't need to edit the other files, and they should be left as-is.

## Configure your Worker for your Turso database

The Turso client library requires two pieces of information to make a connection.

* `LIBSQL_DB_URL` - the connection string for your Turso database.
* `LIBSQL_DB_AUTH_TOKEN` - the authentication token for your Turos database. This should be kept a secret, and not committed to source code.

To get the URL for your database, run the following Turso CLI command, and copy the result:

```sh
$ turso db show my-db --url
# Output:
libsql://my-db-<your-github-username>.turso.io
```

> Open `wrangler.toml` in your editor and at the bottom of the file, create a new `[vars]` section representing the [environmental variables](/workers/platform/environment-variables/) for your project:

Reviewer: The documentation calls these "environment" variables (not "environmental"). Is that the right thing to say here?

```sh
---
filename: wrangler.toml
---
[vars]
LIBSQL_DB_URL = "paste-your-url-here"
```

Save the changes to `wrangler.toml`.

Next, we'll create a long-lived authentication token for our Worker to use when connecting to our database. Run the following Turso CLI command, and copy the output to your clipboard:

```sh
$ turso db tokens create my-db -e none
# Will output a long text string (an encoded JSON Web Token)
```

We'll now create a [Secret](/workers/platform/environment-variables/#add-secrets-to-your-project) to keep our authentication token, well, secret:

```sh
# Ensure you specify the secret name exactly: your Worker will need to reference it later.

> ➜  wrangler secret put LIBSQL_DB_AUTH_TOKEN

Reviewer: This could be `npx wrangler` similar to the first invocation of wrangler above, which would prevent the need for a full local installation.

But if this tutorial wants wrangler to be definitely installed and in the path first, maybe the first `npx wrangler init` shouldn't use npx at all. (Just looking for consistency here.)

-------------------------------------------------------
? Enter a secret value: › <paste your token here>
```

Press <Enter> to save the token as a secret. Both `LIBSQL_DB_URL` and `LIBSQL_DB_AUTH_TOKEN` will be available in our Worker's environment at runtime.

## Install extra libraries

Install the Turso client library and a router:

```sh
$ npm install @libsql/client itty-router
```

The `@libsql/client` library allows you to query a Turso database. The `itty-router` library is a lightweight router we will use to help handle incoming requests to the worker.

## Write your Worker

> Let's write our Worker. Our Worker will:

Author: Modifying. Will clarify.

Open `src/index.ts` and delete the existing template. Copy the below code (exactly) and paste it into the file:

```ts
---
filename: src/index.ts
---

import { Client as LibsqlClient, createClient } from '@libsql/client/web';
import { Router, RouterType } from 'itty-router';

export interface Env {
    // The following two variables come from the worker environment
    LIBSQL_DB_URL?: string;
    LIBSQL_DB_AUTH_TOKEN?: string;

    // These objects are created before first use, then stashed here
    client?: LibsqlClient;
    router?: RouterType;
}

export default {
    async fetch(request: Request, env: Env): Promise<Response> {
        if (env.router === undefined) {
            env.client = buildLibsqlClient(env);
            env.router = buildRouter(env);
        }

        return env.router.handle(request);
    },
};

function buildLibsqlClient(env: Env): LibsqlClient {
    const url = env.LIBSQL_DB_URL.trim();
    if (url === undefined) {
        throw new Error('LIBSQL_DB_URL env var is not defined')
    }

    const authToken = env.LIBSQL_DB_AUTH_TOKEN.trim();
    if (authToken === undefined) {
        throw new Error('LIBSQL_DB_AUTH_TOKEN env var is not defined')

>     }

Reviewer 2: This will throw before hitting the `if` checks due to calling `trim()` on `undefined` - using optional chaining will give us the desired behaviour.

Would it be better to suggest the changes in Wrangler's repository and then copy it over to the docs PR when merged?

Author: Good catch. Should fix both here & the templates/ repo.

(A better way to embed snippets across repos would be nice...)

Reviewer 2: Amongst linting, generating Wrangler docs from source code (yargs help, TS types, etc) and other things, being able to have snippets in their own repos with tests & pull them in at build-time is something I've wanted for awhile haha

Reviewer: This could be more correctly written:

```javascript
    const url = env.LIBSQL_DB_URL?.trim()
    if (url === undefined) {
        throw new Error('LIBSQL_DB_URL env var is not defined')
    }
```

    const router = Router();

    router.get('/users', async request => {
        const rs = await client.execute('select * from example_users');
        return new Response(
            JSON.stringify(rs),
            { headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' } }
        );
    });

    router.get('/add-user', async request => {
        const email = request.query.email
        if (email === undefined) {
            return new Response('Missing email', { status: 400 });
        }
        if (typeof email !== 'string') {
            return new Response('email must be a single string', { status: 400 });
        }
        if (email.length === 0) {
            return new Response('email length must be > 0', { status: 400 });
        }

        try {
            await client.execute({
                sql: 'insert into example_users values (?)',
                args: [ email ]
            });
        } catch (e) {
            console.error(e);
            return new Response('database insert failed');
        }

        return new Response('Added');
    });

    router.all('*', () => new Response('Not Found.', { status: 404 }));

    return router;
}
```

> Save the file with your changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Save your `src/index.ts` file with your changes.
```

Note:

* The libSQL client library import '@libsql/client/web' must be imported exactly as shown when working with Cloudflare workers. The non-web import will not work in the Workers environment.

> * The Env interface contains the environment variable and secret we defined earlier.
> * The Env interface also caches the libSQL client object and router, which are created on the first request to the worker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `Env` interface contains the environment variable and secret you defined earlier.
* The `Env` interface also caches the libSQL client object and router, which are created on the first request to the Worker.
```

> * The `/users` route fetches all rows from the example_users table you created in the Turso shell. It simply serializes the ResultSet object as JSON directly to the caller.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The `/users` route fetches all rows from the `example_users` table you created in the Turso shell. It simply serializes the `ResultSet` object as JSON directly to the caller.
```

* The `/add-user` route inserts a new row using a value provided in the query string.

> With our environment configured and our code ready, let's move on to testing locally before we deploy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With your environment configured and your code ready, you will now test your Worker locally before you deploy.
```

## Run the Worker locally with Wrangler

To run a local instance of our Worker (entirely on your machine), run the following command:

```sh

> $ wrangler dev --local

Reviewer: Tagging one more instance of npx-or-not.

```

You should see output similar to the following:

```sh
Your worker has access to the following bindings:
- Vars:
  - LIBSQL_DB_URL: "your-url"
⎔ Starting a local server...
╭─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ [b] open a browser, [d] open Devtools, [l] turn off local mode, [c] clear console, [x] to exit                                                                  	│
╰─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
Debugger listening on ws://127.0.0.1:61918/1064babd-bc9d-4bed-b171-b35dab3b7680
For help, see: https://nodejs.org/en/docs/inspector
Debugger attached.
[mf:inf] Worker reloaded! (40.25KiB)
[mf:inf] Listening on 0.0.0.0:8787
[mf:inf] - http://127.0.0.1:8787
[mf:inf] - http://192.168.1.136:8787
[mf:inf] Updated `Request.cf` object cache!
```

The localhost address — the one with `127.0.0.1` in it — is a web-server running locally on your machine.

> Let's connect to it and validate our Worker returns the email address we inserted back when we first created our `example_users` table by visiting the `/users` route in your browser: [http://127.0.0.1:8787/users](http://127.0.0.1:8787/users) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Connect to it and validate your Worker returns the email address you inserted when you created your `example_users` table by visiting the `/users` route in your browser: [http://127.0.0.1:8787/users](http://127.0.0.1:8787/users).
```

You should see JSON similar to the following containing the data from the `example_users` table:

```json
{"columns":["email"],"rows":[{"email":"foo@bar.com"}],"rowsAffected":0}
```

{{<Aside type="warning">}}
If you see an error instead of a list of users, double check that:

* You have entered the correct value for your `LIBSQL_DB_URL` in `wrangler.toml`.
* You have set a secret called `LIBSQL_DB_AUTH_TOKEN` with your database authentication token.

Both of these need to be present and match the variable names in your Worker's code.
{{</Aside>}}

> Let's now test the `/add-users` route and pass it an email address to insert: [http://127.0.0.1:8787/add-user?email=test@test.com](http://127.0.0.1:8787/add-user?email=test@test.com.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Test the `/add-users` route and pass it an email address to insert: [http://127.0.0.1:8787/add-user?email=test@test.com](http://127.0.0.1:8787/add-user?email=test@test.com.)
```

> You should see the text “Added”. If you load the first URL with the /users route again ([http://127.0.0.1:8787/users](http://127.0.0.1:8787/users)), it will show the newly added row. You can repeat this as many times as you like: note that our application is very simple and won't stop you from adding duplicate email addresses.
> 
> Quit wrangler by typing `q` into the shell where it was started.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You should see the text `“Added”`. If you load the first URL with the `/users` route again ([http://127.0.0.1:8787/users](http://127.0.0.1:8787/users)), it will show the newly added row. You can repeat this as many times as you like. Note that due to its design, your application will not stop you from adding duplicate email addresses.

Quit Wrangler by typing `q` into the shell where it was started.
```

## Publish to Cloudflare

> Now that we've validated our Worker can connect to our Turso database, let's publish it. Run the following Wrangler command to publish our Worker publicly:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After you have validated that your Worker can connect to your Turso database, publish your Worker. Run the following Wrangler command to publish our Worker publicly:
```

```sh

> $ npx wrangler publish

Reviewer: Tagging for npx-or-not.

Reviewer: npx-or-not

```

The first time you run this command, it will launch a browser, ask you to sign in with your Cloudflare account, and grant permissions to Wrangler.

> The `publish` command will output some 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `publish` command will output the following:
```

Reviewer 3: This seemed like a sentence cut off mid way? Check if this is what you meant.

```sh
Your worker has access to the following bindings:
- Vars:
  - LIBSQL_DB_URL: "your-url"
...
Published worker-turso-ts (0.19 sec)
  https://worker-turso-ts.<your-Workers-subdomain>.workers.dev
Current Deployment ID: f9e6b48f-5aac-40bd-8f44-8a40be2212ff
```

> Congratulations! You've now published a Worker that can connect to your Turso database, query it, and insert new data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You have now published a Worker that can connect to your Turso database, query it, and insert new data.
```

## Optional: Clean up

> To clean up the resources we created as part of this tutorial:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To clean up the resources you created as part of this tutorial:
```

> * If you don't want to keep this Worker, run `wrangler delete worker-turso-ts` to delete the published Worker.

Reviewer: npx-or-not

> * If you don't want to keep this Worker, run `wrangler delete worker-turso-ts` to delete the published Worker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If you do not want to keep this Worker, run `wrangler delete worker-turso-ts` to delete the published Worker.
```

* You can also delete your Turso database via `turso db destroy my-db`.

> ## Next Steps
> 
> * Find the [complete project source code on GitHub](https://github.com/cloudflare/workers-sdk/tree/main/templates/worker-turso-ts/)
> * Understand how to [debug your Cloudflare Worker](/workers/learning/debugging-workers/)
> * Join the Cloudflare Developer Discord: https://discord.gg/rrZXVVcKQF 
> * Join the ChiselStrike (Turso) Discord: https://discord.com/invite/4B5D7hYwub

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Related resources

* Find the [complete project source code on GitHub](https://github.com/cloudflare/workers-sdk/tree/main/templates/worker-turso-ts/).
* Understand how to [debug your Cloudflare Worker](/workers/learning/debugging-workers/).
* Join the [Cloudflare Developer Discord](https://discord.gg/rrZXVVcKQF).
* Join the [ChiselStrike (Turso) Discord](https://discord.com/invite/4B5D7hYwub).
```
